the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
view additional materials from hundreds
of MIT courses visit MIT opencourseware
at
ocw.mit.edu so we're going to start now
with a new chapter we're going to talk
about Mark of processes uh the good news
is that this is a subject that is a lot
more intuitive and simple in many ways
than uh let's say the pon processes so
hopefully this will be enjoyable so Mark
of processes is a general class of
random processes it's uh in some sense
it's more elaborate than the berul and
Pon processes because now we're going to
have dependencies between different
times instead of having memoryless
processes so the basic idea is the
following in physics for example you
write down equations for how a system
evolves that have the general form the
new state of a system one second later
is some function of the Old
State so Newton equations and all that
in physics allow you to write equations
of this kind and so if you know that a
particle is moving at a certain velocity
and it's at some location You can
predict when it's going to be a little
later Mark of processes have the same
flavor except that there is also some
Randomness that thrown inside the
equation so that's what Mark of process
essentially is it's an it describes the
evolution of a system or of some
variables but in the presence of some
noise so that the motion itself is a bit
random so uh this is a pretty General
framework so pretty much any useful or
interesting random process that you can
think about you can always describe it
as a mark of process if you define
properly the notion of the state so what
we're going to do is we're going to
introduce the class of Mark of processes
by example by talking about the checkout
counter in a supermarket then we're
going to abstract from our example so
that we get a more general definition
and then we're going to do a few things
such as how to predict what's going to
happen and time steps later if we start
at a particular State and then talk a
little bit about some structural
properties of Mark of processes or Mark
of chains so here's our
example you go to the checkout counter
at the supermarket and you stand there
and watch the customers who are who come
so customers come they get in que and
customers get served one at a time so
the discussion is going to be in terms
of supermarket checkout counters but the
same story applies to any service system
you may have a server jobs arrive to
that server they get put in a queue and
the server processes those jobs one at a
time now to make a probabilistic model
we need to make some assumption about
the customer arrivals and the customer
departures and we want to keep things as
simple as possible to get started so
let's assume that customer arrive
according to a beri process with some
parameter P so essentially that's the
same as the assumption that the time
between consecutive customer arrivals is
a geometric random variable with
parameter
P another way of thinking about the
arrival
process uh that's not how it happens but
it's helpful mathematically is to think
of someone who's flipping a coin with
bias equal to p and whenever the coin
lands heads then a customer arrives so
it's as if there's a coin flipping done
by Nature that decides the arrivals of
the customers so we know that uh uh coin
flipping to determine the customer
arrivals is the same as having geometric
inter arrival times we know that from
our study of the bernouli
process okay and now how about the
customer service
times uh we're going to assume that okay
if there is no customer in Q no one
being served then of course no one is
going to depart from the que but if
there is a customer in Q then that that
customer starts being served and is
going to be served for a random amount
of time and we make the assumption that
the time it takes for the for the clerk
to serve the customer has a geometric
distribution with some known parameter Q
so the time it takes to serve a customer
is random because it's random how many
items they've got in their cart and how
many coupons they have to unload and so
on so it's random it's uh in the real
world it has some probability
distribution let's not care exactly
about what it would be in the real world
but as a modeling approximation or just
to get started let's pretend that
customer service times are well
described by a geometric uh distribution
with a parameter Q an equivalent way of
thinking about the customer services
mathematically would be again in terms
of coin flipping that is the clerk has a
coin with a bias q and at each time slot
the clerk flips the coin with
probability Q service is over uh with
probability one minus Q you continue the
service
process an assumption that we're going
to make is that the coin flips that
happen here to determine the arrivals
they're all independent of each other
the coin flips that determine the Ser
the end of service are also independent
from each other but also the coin flips
involved here are independent from the
coin flips that happened there so the
arrival how arrivals happen is
independent with the what happens at the
service
process okay so suppose now you want to
ask to answer a question such as the
following uh the time is 700 p.m. what's
the probability that a customer will be
departing at this particular
time well you'll say it depends if the Q
is empty at that time then you're
certain that you are not going to have a
customer departure but if the Q is non
empty then there is probability q that a
departure will happen at that time so
the answer to a question like this has
something to do with the state of the
system at that time it depends what the
Q is and if I ask you uh will the Q be
empty at
710 well the answer to that question
depends on whether at time at 7 o'
whether the Q was huge or not so knowing
something about the state of the Q right
now is gives me relevant information
about what may happen in the
future so what is the state of the
system therefore we brought to start
using this term so the state basically
corresponds to anything which we that's
relevant anything that's happening right
now that's kind of relevant to what may
happen in the future knowing the size of
the que right now is useful information
for me to uh make predictions about what
may happen 2 minutes later from now so
in this particular example a reasonable
choice for the state is to just count
how many customers we have in the queue
and let's let's assume that our
Supermarket building is not too big so
it can only hold 10 people so we're
going to limit the state instead of
going from zero to Infinity we're going
to uh to truncate our model at 10 so we
have 11 possible States corresponding to
zero customers in Q One customer in Q
two customers and so on all the way up
to 10 so these are the different
possible states of the system assuming
that the store cannot handle more than
customers so so this is the first step
to write down the set of possible states
of our system then the next thing to do
is to start describing the possible
transitions between the
states at any given time step what are
the things that can happen we can have a
customer arrival which moves the state
one Higher we can have a customer
departure which moves the state one low
lower there's the possibility that
nothing happens in which case the state
stays the same and there's also the
possibility of having simultaneously and
an arrival and a departure in which case
the state again stays the same so let's
write some representative
probabilities uh if we have two
customers the probability that during
this step we go down this is the
probability that we have a service
completion but no customer arrival so
this is the probability associated with
this
transition the other possibility is that
there's a customer
arrival which happens with probability p
and we do not have a customer departure
and so the probability of that
particular transition is this number and
then finally the probability that we
stay in the same state this can happen
in two possible ways one way is that we
have an arrival and and the departure
simultaneously and the other possibility
is that we have no arrival and no
departure so that the state stays the
same so these transition probabilities
would be the same starting from any
other state St state three or state 9
and so on transition probabilities
become a little different at the borders
at the boundaries of this diagram
because if you're at state zero then you
cannot have any customer departures
there's no one to be served
but there is a probability P that a
customer arrives in which case the the
number of customers in the system goes
to one and probability 1 minus P that
nothing happens similarly with
departures if who if the system is full
there's no room for another arrival but
we may have a departure that happens
with probability q and nothing happens
with probability 1 minus Q so this is
the full transition diagram annot ated
with transition probabilities and this
is a complete description of a mark of
of a discrete time finite State Mark of
chain so this is a complete
probabilistic model once you have all
these pieces of information you can
start calculating things and trying to
predict what's going to happen in the
future now let us abstract from this
example and come up with a more general
definition so
we have this concept of the state which
describes the current situation in the
system that we're looking at the current
state is random so we're going to think
of it as a random variable X subn is the
state and transitions after the system
started operating so the system starts
operating at some initial State x0 and
after nend transitions it moves to State
xn
now we have a set of possible States
state one state two state three and in
general States I and state
J to keep things simple we assume that
the set of possible States is a finite
set as you can imagine we can have
systems in which the state space is
going to be infinite it could be
discrete or continuous but all that is
more difficult and more complicated it
makes sense to start from the simplest
possible setting where we just deal with
the finite State
space and time is discrete so we can
think of the states after in the
beginning after one transition two
Transitions and so on so we're in
discrete time and we have finitely many
states so the system starts somewhere
and at every time step the state is
let's say here a whistle blows and the
state jumps to a random next state
so it may move here or it may move there
or it may move here or it might stay in
place so one possible transition is the
transition where you jump and just land
in the same place where you started from
now to describe we want to describe the
statistics of these transitions if I am
at that State How likely is it that next
time I'm going to find myself at that
State well we describe the statist iscs
of this transition by writing down a
transition
probability uh the transition
probability of going from state
three to State one so this transition
probability is to be thought of as a
conditional probability given that right
now I am at State I what is the
probability that next time I find myself
at State
J so given that right now I am at state
three 31 is the probability that next
time I'm going to find myself at State
one uh similarly here we would have a
probability P3 I which is the
probability that given that right now
I'm at state three next time I'm going
to find myself at State
I now one can write such conditional
probabilities down in principle but we
need to make so you might think of this
as a definition here but we need to make
one additional big assumption and this
is the assumption that makes a process
to be a mark of process this is the
so-called Mark of property and here's
what it
says let me describe it first in words
here every time that I find myself at
state three the probability that next
time I'm going to find myself at State
one is this particular number no matter
how I got there that is this transition
probability is not affected by the past
of the process it doesn't care about
what path I used to to find myself at
state three mathematically it means the
following you have this transition
probability that from I you jump to
State J suppose that I gave you some
additional information that I told you
everything else that happened in the
past of the process everything that
happened how did you get to State I the
Assumption we're making is that this
information about the past has no
bearing in making predictions about the
future as long as you know where you are
right now so if I tell you right now I
you are at State I and by the way you
got there by following a particular path
you can ignore the extra information of
the particular path that you followed
you only take into account where you are
right now so every time you find
yourself at at that State no matter how
you got there you will find yourself
next time at State one with probability
p31 so the past has no bearing in Into
the Future as long as you know where you
are sitting right
now for this property to happen you need
to choose your state carefully in the
right way
in essence the state needs to include
any information that's relevant about
the future of the system anything that's
not in the state is not going to play a
role but the state needs to have all the
information that's relevant in
determining what kind of transitions are
going to happen next so to take an
example before you go to mark of process
just from the deterministic world if you
have a ball that's flying out in the air
and you want to make predictions about
the future if I tell you that the state
of the ball is the position of the ball
at a particular
time is that enough for you to make
predictions where the ball is going to
go next no you need to know both the
position and the velocity if you know
position and velocity you can make
predictions about the future so the
state of a ball that's flying is
positioned together with velocity
if you were to just take position that
would not be enough information because
if I tell you current position and then
I tell you the past position you could
use the information from the past
position to complete the trajectory and
make the prediction so information from
the past is useful if you don't know the
velocity but if you know both position
and velocity it doesn't care you don't
care how you got there or what time you
started from position and velocity you
can make predictions about the fut
future so there is a certain art or a
certain element of uh thinking a non-
mechanical aspect into problems of this
kind to figure out which is the right
State variable when you define the state
of your system you need to Define it in
such a way that it includes all
information that has been accumulated
that has some relevance for the
Future Okay so the general process for
coming up with a mark of model is to
First make this big decision of what
your state variable is going to be then
you write down the maybe a picture of
the different states then you identify
the possible transitions so sometimes
the diagram that you're going to have
will not include all possible arcs you
will only show those arcs that
correspond to Transitions that are
possible for example in the supermarket
example we did not have a transition
from state two to State five because
that cannot happen you can only have one
arrival at any time so in the diagram we
only showed the possible Transitions and
for each one of the possible transitions
then you work with the description of
the model to figure out the correct
transition probabilities so you annotate
the diagram by writing down transition
probabilities okay so suppose you got
your Mark of
model what will you do with it well what
do we need models for we need models for
in order to make predictions to make
probabilistic predictions so for example
I tell you that the process started at
that State you let it run for some time
where do you think it's going to be 10
time steps from now that's a question
that you might want to answer since the
process is random there's no way for you
to tell me exactly where it's going to
be but maybe you can give me
probabilities you can tell me with so
much probability the state will be there
with so much probability the state will
be there and so on so our first exercise
is to calculate those probabilities
about what may happen to the process a
number of steps in the
future it's handy to have some notation
in here so somebody tells us that this
this process starts at a particular
State I we let the process cess run for
end
transitions it may land it will land at
some State J but that state J at which
it's going to land is going to be random
so we want to give probabilities tell me
with what probability the state n times
steps later is going to be that
particular State
J the Shand notation is to use this
symbol here for the EP transition
probabilities that you find find
yourself at State J given that you
started at State I so the way these two
indices are ordered the way to think
about them is that from I you go to J so
probability that from I you go to J if
you have n steps ahead of in front of
you some of these transition
probabilities are of course easy to
write for
example in zero
transitions you are going to be exactly
where you started so this probability is
going to be equal to 1 if I is equal to
J and zero if I is different than J okay
that's an easy one to write down if you
have only one
transition what's the probability that
one step later you find yourself in
state J given that you started at State
I what is
this these are just the order AR
one-step transition probabilities that
were given in the description of the
problem so by definition the one state
transition probabilities are of this
form this is these two
are this equation this equality is
correct just because of the way that we
defined those two
quantities now we want to say something
about the nstep transition probabilities
when N is a larger is a bigger number
number okay so here we're going to use
the total probability theorem so we're
going to condition into different
scenarios and break up the calculation
of this quantity by considering the
different ways that this event can
happen so what is the event of Interest
the event of interest is the following
at Time Zero we start
I we are interested in landing at time n
at the particular State J
now this event can happen in several
different ways in lots of different ways
but let us group them into subgroups one
group or one sort of scenario is the
following during the first n minus one
time steps you things happen and somehow
you end up at State one and then from
State one at the next time step you make
a transition to State
J this particular
uh Arc here actually corresponds to lots
and lots of different possible scenarios
or different paths or different
transitions in N minus one time steps
there's lots of possible ways by which
you could end up at State one different
paths through the state space but all of
them together collectively have a
probability which is the n minus one
step transition probability that from
State I you end up at State
one and then there's other possible
scenarios uh perhaps in the first n
minus one steps you follow the
trajectory that took you at State M and
then from State M you did this
transition and you ended up at State J
so this diagram breaks up the set of all
possible trajectories from I to J into
different collections where each
collection uh has to do with which one
happens to be the state just before the
last time step Just Before Time n and
we're going to condition on the states
at time n minus
one so the total probability of ending
up at State J is the sum of the
probabilities of the different scenario
of the different ways that you can get
to State J if we look at that kind of
that type of scenario what's the
probability of that scenario happen with
probability R i1 of n minus one I find
myself at State one at time n minus one
this is just by the definition of these
multi-step transition probabilities this
is the number of transitions the
probability that from State I I end up
at State one and then given that I found
myself at State one with probability p 1
J that's the transition probability next
time I'm going to find myself at State J
so the product of these two is the total
probability of my getting from State I
to State J through State one at the time
before now where exactly did we use the
mark of assumption
here no matter which particular path we
used to get from I to state one the
probability that next time I'm going to
make this transition is that same number
p1j so that number does not depend on
the particular path that I followed in
order to get there if we didn't have the
mark of assumption we should have
considered all possible individual
trajectories here and then we would need
to use the transition probability that
corresponds to that particular
trajectory but because of the mark of
assumption the only thing that matters
is that right now we are at State one it
does not matter how we got
there so now once you consider this
scenario then this scenario and that
scenario and you add the probabilities
of all these different scenarios you end
up with this formula here which is a
recursion it tells us that once you have
computed the N minus one step transition
probabilities then you can compute also
the endep transition probabilities this
is a recursion that you execute or you
run for all I's and JS simultaneously
that is fix and for a particular n you
calculate this quantity for all possible
ij's KS you have all those quantities
and then you you use this equation to
find those numbers again for all
possible I and
JS now the this is a Formula which is
always
true and there's a big idea behind that
formula
and now there's variations of this
formula depending on whether you're
interested in something that's slightly
different so for
example if you were to have a random
initial State and you want to you
somebody gives you the probability
distribution of the initial state so you
are told that with probability such and
such you're going to start at say State
one with that probability you're going
to start at state two and so on and you
want to find the probability that at
time n you find yourself at State J
well again total probability theorem you
condition on the initial state with this
probability you find yourself at that
particular initial State and given that
this is your initial State this is the
probability that end time steps later
you find your step yourself at State
J now building again on the same
idea you can run recursions of this kind
by conditioning at different times so
here's a variation
you start at State I after one time step
you'll find yourself at State one with
probability pi i1 and you find yourself
at States M with probability p i
m and once that
happens then you're going to follow some
trajectories and there is a possibility
that you're going to end up at State J
after n -1 *
steps this scenario can happen in many
possible ways there's lots of possible
paths from State one to State J there's
many paths from State M to State J what
is the collective probability of all
these
transitions this is the event that
starting from State one I end up at
State J in N minus one time steps so
this one has here probability R1 J of n
minus one and similarly uh down here and
then by using the same way of thinking
as before we get a formula that r i j of
n is the sum over all KS of p i k and
then the r of K J and minus
one so this formula looks almost the
same as this one but it's actually
different uh the indices and the way
things work out are a bit different but
the basic idea is the same here we use
the total probability theorem by
conditioning on the state just one step
before the end of our time Horizon here
we condition we use the total
probability theorem by conditioning on
the state right after the first
transition so this general idea has
different variations they're all valid
and depending on the context that you're
dealing with you might want to work with
one of these or or
another so let's illustrate these uh
calculations in terms of an example so
in this
example we just have two states and
somebody gives us transition
probabilities to be those particular
numbers let's write down the equations
so the probability that starting
from just do from State one I find
myself at State one end time steps later
this can happen in two ways at time n
minus one I might find myself at state
two and then from state two I make a
transition back to State one which
happens with
probability why did I put two there
anyway point point two and and another
way is that from State one I go to state
one in N minus one steps and then from
State one I stay where I am which
happens with probability.
five so this is a recursion for R11 of
n uh now
R12 of
n we can write a similar recursion for
this one on the other hand since these
are probabilities the state at time n is
going to be either State one or state
two so these two numbers need to add to
one so we can just write that this is 1
minus R1 one of
N and this is enough of a recursion to
calculate R to propagate R11 and R12 as
time goes on so the probability that I
find my so after n minus one transitions
either find myself at state two and then
there's a point two transition that I go
to one or I find myself at State one
which is with that probability and from
there I have probability five of staying
where I am so now let's start
calculating as we discussed before if I
start at State one after zero
transitions I'm certain to be at State
one and I'm certain not to be at state
two if I start from state two I'm
certain to not be at State one at that
time and I'm certain that I am right now
at state two after I make one
transition starting from State one
there's probability Point there's
probability point five that I stay at
State one and there's probability point
five that I move to state
two if I were to start from state two
the probability that I go to one in one
time step is this transition that has
probability point two and the other one
is8 okay so the calculation now becomes
more interesting if we want to calculate
the next
term How likely is it that at time two I
find myself at State
one in order to be here at State one
this can happen in two
ways either the first transition left me
there and the second transition is the
same so this correspond to this 0 five
that the first transition took me there
and the next transition was also of the
same kind that's one possibility but
there's another scenario in order to be
at State one at time two this can also
happen this way so that's the event that
after one transition I got
there and the next transition happened
to be this one so this corresp responds
to.5 * 2 it corresponds to taking the
one-step transition probability of
getting there times the probability that
from state two I move to State one which
in this case is 0.2 so basically we take
this number multiplied with 0. 2 and
then add those two numbers and after you
add them here you get 35 and similarly
here you're going to get 65
and now to continue with the recursion
we keep doing the same thing we take
this number times 0. five plus this
number times 02 add them up you get the
next entry keep doing that keep doing
that and eventually you will notice that
the numbers start settling into a
limiting value uh
2.7 and let's verify this if this number
is 2.7 what is the next number going to
be the next number is going to
be
uh 27ths not 2.7 it's going to be 27
that's the probability that I find
myself at that State times
0.5 uh that the next
transition takes me to State one plus
57s that would be the probability that I
the remaining probability that I find
myself at state two
times
uh Time 1
15 and so that gives me again 2 over 7
so this calculation basically
illustrates that if this number has
become 2.7 then the next number is also
going to be 2.7 and of course this
number here is going to have to be
5.7 5 over s and this one will have to
be again the same 5 over 7 so the
probability that I find myself at State
one after a long time has elapsed
settles into some steady state value so
that's an interesting phenomenon we just
make this observation now we can also do
the calculation about the probability
starting from state
two and here you do the calculations I'm
not going to to do them but after you do
them you find that this probability also
settles to 2 over 7 and this one also
settles to 5 over
7 what so these numbers here are the
same as those numbers what's the
difference between
these this is the probability that I
find myself at State one given that I
started at one this is the probability
that I find myself at State one given
that I started at St at state two these
probabilities are the same no matter
where I started from so this numerical
example sort of uh illustrates the idea
that after the chain has run for a long
time what the state of the chain is does
not care about the initial state of the
chain so whether so if you start here
you know that you're are going to stay
here for some time a few transitions
because this probability is kind of
small so the initial state does does
tell you something but in the very long
run transitions of this kind are going
to happen transitions of that kind are
going to happen these are there's a lot
of Randomness that comes in and that
Randomness washes out any information
that could come from the initial state
of the system
we describe this situation by saying
that the mark of chain eventually enters
a steady
state where steady state what does it
mean does it mean that the state itself
becomes steady and stops at one place no
the state of the chain keeps jumping
forever the state of the chain will keep
making transitions will keep going back
and forth between one and two so the
state itself the xn does not become
steady in any sense what becomes steady
are the probabilities that describe xn
that is after a long time elapses the
probability that you find yourself at
State one becomes a constant 2 over 7
and the probability that you find
yourself at state two becomes a constant
so jumps will keep happening but at any
given time time if you ask what's the
probability that right now I am at State
one the answer is going to be 2 over
7 incidentally do the numbers sort of
make sense why is this number bigger
than that
number well this state is a little more
sticky than that state once you enter
here it's kind of harder to get out so
when you enter here you spend a lot of
time here this one is easier to get out
because that probability is 0. five so
when you enter there you tend to get out
faster so you keep moving from one to
the other but you tend to spend more
time on that state and this is reflected
in this probability being bigger than
that one so no matter where you start
there's five sth probability of being
here two sth probability of being
there so there were some really nice
things that happened in this
example uh the question is whether
things are always As Nice for General
Mark of change the two nice things that
happened were the following as we keep
doing this calculation this number
settles to something the limit exists
the other thing that happens is that
this number is the same as that number
which means that the initial state does
not matter is this always the
case is it always the case that as n
goes to Infinity the transition
probabilities converge to something
and if they do converge to something is
it the case that the limit does is not
affected by the initial State I at which
the chain started so mathematically
speaking the question we are raising is
whether r i j of n converges to
something and where that something to
which it converges
to has only to do with J it's the
probability that you find yourself at
State J and that probability doesn't
care about the initial state so it's the
question of whether the initial state
gets forgotten in the long
run so the answer is that usually or for
nice chains both of these things uh will
be true you'll get a limit which does
not depend on the initial state but if
your chain has some somewhat uh peculiar
unique structure this might not happen
so let's think first about the issue of
convergence here look at this ex so
convergence as n goes to Infinity to a
steady value really means the following
if I tell you a lot of time has passed
then you'll tell me okay the St the
probabilities are equal to that value
without having to consult your clock if
you don't have convergence it means that
r i j can keep going up and down without
settling to something so in order for
you to tell me the value of r i j you
need to consult your clock to check if
right now it's up or is it down so
there's some kind of periodic behavior
that you might get when you do not get
convergence and this example here
illustrates it so what's happen in this
example starting from state two next
time you go here or there with
probability half and then next time no
matter where you are you move back to
state two so this chain has some
Randomness but the randomness is kind of
a limited type you go out you come in
you go out you come in so there's a
periodic pattern that gets repeated it
means that if you start at state two
after an even number of steps you are
certain to be back at state two so this
probability here is one on the other and
if the number of transitions is odd
there's no way that you can be at your
initial State at if you start here at
even times you will be here at odd times
you will be there or there so this
probability is zero as n goes to
Infinity this probability the endep
transition probability does not converge
to anything it keeps alternating between
zero and one so convergence fails this
is the main mechanism by which
convergence can fail if your chain has a
periodic structure and we're going to
discuss last next time that if
periodicity is absent then we don't have
an issue with convergence the second
question is whether if if we have
convergence whether the initial State
matters or not in the previous chain
where you could keep going back and
forth between states one and two
numerically one finds that the initial
state does not matter but you can think
of situations where the initial state
does matter look at this chain
here if you start at State one you stay
at State One Forever there's no way to
escape so this means that R11 of n is
one for all
n if you start at state three you will
be moving between states three and four
but there's no way to go in that
direction so there's no way that you go
to state to state 1 and for that reason
r31 is zero for all
n okay
and so this is a case where the initial
State matters
R11 goes to a limit as n goes to
Infinity because it's constant it's
always one so the limit is one R 31 or
also has a limit it's zero for all times
so these are the long-term probabilities
of finding yourself at State one but
those long-term probabilities are
affected by where you started if you
start here you're sure that in the long
term you'll be here if you start here
you're are sure that in the long term
you will not be there so the initial
state does matter here and this is a
situation where certain states are not
accessible from certain other states so
it has something to do with the graph
structure of our Mark of chain finally
let's answer this question here uh at
least for large
ends what do you think is going to
happen in the long term if you start at
state
two if you start at state two you may
stay at state two for a random amount of
time but eventually this transition will
happen or that transition will happen
because of the symmetry
you're as likely to take to escape from
state two in this direction or in that
direction so there's probability one
half that when the transition happens
the transition happens in that direction
so for large
n for large n you're certain that the
transition does happen and given that
the transition has happened it's equal
it has probability one half that it has
gone that particular way so clearly here
you see that the probabilities of
finding yourself in a particular state
is very much affected by where you
started from so what we want to do next
is to abstract from these two examples
and describe the general structural
properties that have to do with
periodicity and that have to do with
what happened here with certain States
not being accessible from the others
we're going to leave periodicity for
next time but let's talk about the
second kind of phenomenon the we have
okay so here what we're going to do is
to classify the states in a transition
diagram into two types recurrent and
transient so a state is said to be
recurrent if the following is
true if you start from State
I you can go to some places but no
matter where you go there is a way of
coming
back so what's an example example of a
recurrent State this
one there starting from here you can go
elsewhere you can go to state seven you
can go to state six that's all where you
can go to but no matter where you go
there is a path that can take you back
there so no matter where you go there is
a chance and there is a way of returning
where you started those States we call
recurrent and by this eight is recurrent
all of these are recurrent so this is
recurrent this is recurrent and this
state five is also recurrent you cannot
go anywhere from five except to five
itself wherever you can go you can go
back to where you started so this is
recurrent if it is not recurrent we say
that it is transient so what does
transient mean you need to take this
definition and reverse it Trent means
that starting from I
there is a place to which you can go and
from which you cannot
return if it's recurrent anywhere you go
you can always come back transient means
there are places where you can go from
which you cannot come back so State one
is recurrent because starting from here
there's a possibility that you get there
and then there's no way back State four
is recurrent starting from four there's
somewhere you can go
and sorry transient correct State four
is transient starting from here there
are places where you can go and from
which you cannot come back and in this
particular diagram all these four states
are
transients now a state if a state is
transient it
means that there is a way to go
somewhere where you're going to get
stuck and not be able to come back as
long as your state keeps circulating
around here eventually one of these
transitions is going to happen and once
that happens then there's no way that
you can come back so that state the
state the transient state will be
visited only a finite number of times
you will not be able to return to it and
in the long run you are certain that
you're going to get out of the transient
States and get to a some class of
recurrent States and get stuck forever
so uh let's see in this diagram if I
start here could I stay in this lamp of
States forever where as long as I'm
staying in this lamp of States I will
keep visiting States one and two each
time that I visit state two there's
going to be a positive probability that
I escape so in the long run if I were to
State here I would visit if state to an
infinite number of times and I would get
infinite chances to escape but if you
have infinite chances to escape once
eventually you will escape so you're pre
you're certain that with probability one
starting from here you're going to move
either to those States or to those
States so starting from from transient
States you only stay at the transient
States for a finite for a random but
finite amount of time and after that
happens you end up into a to a class of
recurrent States and when I say class
what I mean is that in this picture I
divide the recurrent States into two
classes or categories what's special
about them these states are recurrent
these states are recurrent but there's
no communication between the two if you
start here you're stuck here if you
start here you are stuck there and this
is a case where the initial state does
matter because if you start here you get
stuck here if you start there you get
stuck there so depending on the initial
State that's going to affect the
long-term behavior of your chain so the
guess you can make at this point is that
for the initial state to not matter we
should not have multiple recurrent
classes we should have only one but
we're going to get back to this point
next time